= Philosophy of How to Learn
:revdate: 2023-05-07
:page-tag: philosophy

The background and context on why the groupings exist the way they do, and the
different sorts of pages you'll find in this section.  But, this is all
philosophical waxing, so quite skippable.

== Why Learning is Hard

There's a number of topics in databases and distributed systems which are
difficult to pick up, and I claim they can be roughly categorized as being
difficult for one of two reasons:

1. The topic is complicated because it is deep and full of nuance, with an
extensive history of research.  It's hard to know where to start, and how to
effectively get to the point where you can read and meaningfully understand
current research.
2. The topic is complicated because it is wide and under-published.  People
typically learn the subject from experience in an area, and there's no singular
place to which one can point someone new to the area in order to learn about it.
A singular collection of information could counteract the breadth of the topic,
but instead in its absence, useful information is strewn in tidbits across
codebases, mailing lists, blog posts, etc., and only collected in the minds of
experienced practitioners.

Which is still quite abstract and overly generalized, so let's use some concrete examples.

[#depth]
== Difficulty Due to Depth

Distributed systems and database research has been ongoing since the 1970s.  Any
given subfield has grown such that just reading everything in published order
would be an insurmountable task.  Query optimization, storage engines,
replication, consensus, etc., are all complex topics with already an intractable
quantity of published research.  After 50 years, publications generally assume a
significant context, and lean heavily on terminology specialized to the area.
After all, many publications are written with a strict 12 page limit, and so
relying on background and context is necessary even just for space reasons.

Thus, our goal is to be gently introduced to the concepts and terminology of the
area, gradually preparing us to be able to understand currently published work.
Pages on topics in this category are thus ordered by iteratively increasing the
depth at which a given topic is explored:

1. Blog posts
2. Textbooks and lectures
3. Surveys
4. Publications

Blog posts, especially those aimed at beginners, are often the gentlest
introduction to a new area.  There's posts written by experts trying to give a
simplified and well structured introduction to the area, and there's posts
written by folk also new to the area discussing what they've just learned and
understood.  Regardless of the authorship perspective, blog posts are often
aimed at a less technical audience and don't rely as heavily on pre-established
context.  Reading multiple blog posts on the same topic provides both a
repetitive reinforcement of the material and multiple vantage points to try and
understand the topic better.

Textbooks and lectures given detailed and precise descriptions of what they
cover, and are generally self-contained such that a beginner is given everything
needed to understand the material.  They do require a significantly larger time
investment, and due to the immense labor involved in creating a textbook, tend
to lag significantly behind modern research, if a textbook even exists which
covers the topic at all.  But their formal treatment of the subject matter does
a great job of comprehensively filling in details that the informal and
imprecise teachings of blog posts might have missed, and prepare the reader well
for reading papers.

Survey papers catalog and classify previous research in an area.  They highlight
the major pieces of work, provide a framework for comparing and contrasting
systems, and generally conclude with some forward looking perspective on either
missing research areas identified in the work or future directions in which the
area might evolve.  This provides a list of good starting papers to read, a
description of the strengths or weaknesses to pay attention to in the class of
systems, and the framework to keep in mind when looking at new papers in the
area.  Good survey papers are incredibly useful for trying to quickly understand
the state of research in an area, but not all topics have (sufficiently recent)
survey papers.  If the area doesn't, then a possible workaround is to find PhD
theses from recent graduates who wrote papers in the area, and then read
specifically the background section of the thesis, which tends to be somewhat
similar in providing the background, motivation, and context to their published
work.

Finally, go find a set of related publications to read.  I specifically suggest
reading papers that try to address the same overall problem in different ways
together, to be able to compare and contrast the approaches.  (Note again how
helpful survey papers are with both these goals.)  In general, publications tend
to oversell their strengths and undersell (or omit) their weaknesses.  My goal
in reading papers is to identify when I would or would not want to apply the
ideas presented in the paper, so being able to identify those weaknesses has
been a good indicator to me of understanding of a paper and research area.  

When discussing this ordering with others, the disagreement has largely been
around that papers deserve to be listed far higher in the list.  This argument
has merit: there's a number of well written papers which manage to remain
approachable, and not all of a paper needs to be fully understood in order to
obtain value from reading it.  But I think this stems from a different goal.  If
your interest is along the line of trying to broadly follow modern research
across Computer Science, then this entire approach is likely the opposite of
what you wish.  Something like https://blog.acolyer.org/[The Morning Paper]
would likely be a much better fit, or similar blogs that cover papers in
high-level detail.

[#breadth]
== Difficulty Due to Breadth

If you wish to write a TCP/IP stack for a real world product, you don't need to
just be compatible with the TCP/IP standards, you need to be compatible with
every broken TCP/IP stack that any other product has ever shipped.  No one
maintains a list of every deviation from a standard that needs to be handled and
accounted for.  Any topic that deals with the history of working around any and
all previously existing (and potentially incorrectly implemented) software or
hardware products is difficult because accumulating that list is difficult.

There's other subject areas which are difficult because companies refuse to
release information about their products, and anyone who gains that knowledge is
placed under a Non-Disclosure Agreement.  If you'd like to know specific details
about how the processor works which your code runs on, good luck getting that
information from any CPU manufacturer.  If you'd like to know how an SSD works
internally to better optimize a storage engine for it, don't hold your breath.
Sometimes experience or time spent benchmarking a product is the only way to
gain the necessary information, and actively listening around for details
dropped from NDAs being bent.

For all such subjects, there is no great guiding learning process I have to
recommend.  Pages in this series for these topics are simply just aggregations
of information across the web, to try to centralize it as much as possible, and
make sure that at least the reader can become aware of the terminology and
details relevant for the area.